Add Limit Trie Logs Early Access Feature Guide (#1538)
hyperledger/besu-docs: docs/public-networks/how-to/bonsai-limit-trie-logs.md

---

> title: Reduce database size using Bonsai Tries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Reduce database size for Bonsai Tries
```

Not sure my suggestion is best but the original title sounds to me like "if you enable bonsai tries, you will reduce database size" (which is also true, but different to this exact feature.
For this feature it's more like, "if you are using bonsai trie, enable/run this to reduce database size".

sidebar_position: 12
description: Enable this feature to reduce the size of your database
tags:
  - public networks
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

To decrease the database size using the [Bonsai Trie](../concepts/data-storage-formats#bonsai-tries) data storage policy in Besu, enable the early access feature `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled`. 
When enabled, this feature can reduce database growth by more than 3GB each week on mainnet.

> ## Limit Trie Logs for Bonsai

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step-by-Step Guide
```

Author: We don't usually add headings that are not specific or descriptive (probably for SEO and findability reasons). The docs usually have scannable headings (that start with an action word). Is it okay if we add a more descriptive title for the procedure?

Reviewer: "Limit trie logs" is just the first part of the guide, the rest of the guide is instructing the user how to prune old trie logs...I think "Limit trie logs and prune" is more accurate.

:::caution

The following commands are examples. Before executing these example commands on your node, modify them to apply to your node's configuration.

:::

1. Add the `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled` option to the [Besu configuration file](configuration-file).

> 1. Stop Besu. If Besu is running in a terminal, you can usually stop it by pressing `Ctrl+C`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Stop Besu.
```

Think that sentence can be removed: no mainnet user will be running it in a terminal like this as it's a long running process. Also, Ctrl+C is PC-centric, it would be Cmd-C on Mac for example.

> 1. (optional) Run the Besu client. Specify the Bonsai Trie data storage format and a data directory for the pruned trie logs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. (optional) Run the Besu Trie Log prune command. Specify the Bonsai Trie data storage format and the data directory for your Besu database:
```

>     ```bash title="Specify Bonsai Trie for pruned logs"

Author: ```suggestion
    ```bash title="Specify Bonsai Trie for pruned logs"
```

Reviewer: Think we should consistently use either "Trie Logs" or "trie logs".

>     ```bash title="Specify Bonsai Trie for pruned logs"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ```bash title="Run the Trie Log Prune command"
```

    sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --data-path=/var/lib/besu --sync-mode=X_SNAP storage x-trie-log prune
    ```
1. Restart Besu. You can restart Besu by navigating to the directory where your Besu executable is located and running the same command you used to start it initially. 
If you are using a `systemd` service file, as recommended by [CoinCashew](https://www.coincashew.com/coins/overview-eth/guide-or-how-to-setup-a-validator-on-eth2-mainnet/part-i-installation/step-3-installing-execution-client/besu) 
and [Somer](https://someresat.medium.com/guide-to-staking-on-ethereum-ubuntu-teku-f09ecd9ef2ee), ensure you execute `sudo systemctl daemon-reload`.
1. Look for `Limit trie logs enabled: retention: 512; prune window: 30000` in your Besu configuration printout at startup.

> ## Restart Besu

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Limit Trie Logs for Bonsai
```

> When Besu restarts, it will prune and remove unnecessary data, one block at a time. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once Besu is started with `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled`, it will continuously prune, removing unnecessary Trie Log data one block at a time. 
```

2024-02-02 05:46:10.155+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogHelper | Restoring trie logs retained from batch 1...
2024-02-02 05:46:10.222+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogHelper | Key(0): 0xcd50706da7f6f2db7f9d54f3589122760900d9ab2508c20a4ca40b496d930368
... 
2024-02-02 05:46:10.336+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogHelper | Key(511): 0x238f9649b59616430ad7e43b8f3cf65bc97cac4aa54a3eddf3ad6ee666ce733e
2024-02-02 05:46:10.441+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogHelper | Deleting files...
2024-02-02 05:46:10.446+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogSubCommand | Finished pruning. Re-estimating trie logs size...
2024-02-02 05:46:11.023+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogSubCommand | Estimated trie logs size after pruning: 0 B (0 B estimate is normal when using default settings)
2024-02-02 05:46:11.023+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogSubCommand | Prune ran successfully. We estimate you freed up 9 GiB!
Prune ran successfully. We estimate you freed up 9 GiB!
```

If you are using a TOML configuration file, you can run a command similar to the following:

```bash title="TOML file prune trie logs"
sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --config-file=besu-config.toml storage x-trie-log prune
```
## Troubleshoot

> Troubleshoot common errors that can occur when attempting to use Bonsai Tries to reduce your database size. Ensure your command specifies the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Troubleshoot common errors that can occur when attempting to use the Trie Log Prune command to reduce your database size. Ensure your command specifies the following:
```

- `--data-storage-format`
- `--data-path`
- `--sync-mode`

#### Prune command for mainnet

The prune command should look similar to the following:

```bash title="Prune command for mainnet"
sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-path=/var/lib/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --sync-mode=SNAP storage x-trie-log prune
```

Ensure you stop Besu before running the command.

####  Subcommand not working

- Error message: `java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Subcommand only works with data-storage-format=BONSAI`

The `--data-storage-format=BONSAI` may be missing. To resolve, add the storage format. The command should look similar to the following:

> ```bash title="P"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash title="Specify data-storage-format"
```

sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --data-path=/var/lib/besu --sync-mode=SNAP storage x-trie-log prune
```

> #### Column handle not found

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Column handle not found for segment TRIE_BRANCH_STORAGE
```

...to avoid duplication with WORLD_STATE

 Ensure you specify the `data-path`. Your command should look similar to the following:

```bash title="Specify data-path"
sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-path=/var/lib/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --sync-mode=SNAP storage x-trie-log prune
```

#### Database not detected

- Error message: `java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Trying to retain more trie logs than chain length (0), skipping pruning`

Ensure you specify the correct `--data-path` for your node. Your command should look similar to the following:

```bash title="Correct data-path"
sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-path=/var/lib/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --sync-mode=SNAP storage x-trie-log prune
```

#### Cannot store generated private key

- Error message: `java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Cannot store generated private key`

Ensure you specify the correct `--data-path` for your node. Your command should look similar to the following:

```bash title="Correct data-path"
sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-path=/var/lib/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --sync-mode=SNAP storage x-trie-log prune
```

> #### Valid keyPair not provided

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Sudo required
```

Author: I think the original is more findable. They might not know the resolution requires sudo

Reviewer: If the intent is for a user to search for their error message, should we just change this title to match the error message?

- Error message: `java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Supplied file does not contain valid keyPair pair.`

Check your file permissions and try running a `sudo` command to resolve:

```bash title="Correct permissions"
sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --data-path=/var/lib/besu storage --sync-mode=SNAP x-trie-log prune
```

> #### Column handle not found

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Column handle not found for segment WORLD_STATE
```

...to avoid duplication with TRIE_BRANCH_STORAGE

- Error message: `java.lang.RuntimeException: Column handle not found for segment WORLD_STATE`

Ensure you are using `data-storage-format=BONSAI` instead of `data-storage-format=FOREST` on an existing Bonsai database.

#### Resource temporarily unavailable

- Error message: `org.hyperledger.besu.plugin.services.exception.StorageException: org.rocksdb.RocksDBException: While lock file: /data/besu/database/LOCK: Resource temporarily unavailable`

> Check if Besu is already running. You may need to shut down the Besu client before running the subcommand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check if Besu is already running. You need to shut down the Besu client before running the subcommand.
```

---
title: Reduce storage for Bonsai Tries
sidebar_position: 12
description: Enable this feature to reduce the size of your database for Bonsai Tries
tags:
  - public networks
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

> To decrease the database size when using the [Bonsai Trie](../concepts/data-storage-formats#bonsai-tries) data storage policy, enable the early access feature `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To decrease the database size when using the [Bonsai Trie](../concepts/data-storage-formats#bonsai-tries) data storage format, enable the early access feature `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled`. 
```

---
title: Reduce storage for Bonsai Tries
sidebar_position: 12
description: Enable this feature to reduce the size of your database when using Bonsai Tries
tags:
  - public networks
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

To decrease the database size when using the [Bonsai Trie](../concepts/data-storage-formats#bonsai-tries) data storage format, enable the early access feature `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled`. 

> When enabled, this feature can reduce database growth by more than 3GB each week on mainnet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When enabled, this feature can reduce database growth by more than 3 GB each week on Mainnet.
```

## Limit trie logs

:::caution

The following commands are examples. Before executing these example commands on your node, modify them to apply to your node's configuration.

:::

1. Add the `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled` option to the [Besu configuration file](use-configuration-file).
   
    :::note
    
    If you are using a `systemd` service file, as recommended by [CoinCashew](https://www.coincashew.com/coins/overview-eth/guide-or-how-to-setup-a-validator-on-eth2-mainnet/part-i-installation/step-3-installing-execution-client/besu) 

>     and [Somer](https://someresat.medium.com/guide-to-staking-on-ethereum-ubuntu-teku-f09ecd9ef2ee), ensure you execute `sudo systemctl daemon-reload`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    and [Somer Esat](https://someresat.medium.com/guide-to-staking-on-ethereum-ubuntu-teku-f09ecd9ef2ee), ensure you execute `sudo systemctl daemon-reload`.
```

    
    :::
   
1. Stop Besu.

> 1. (Optional) Run the Besu trie log prune command. Specify the Bonsai Trie data storage format and the data directory for your Besu database:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. (Optional) [Prune outdated trie logs.](#prune-outdated-trie-logs) Specify the Bonsai Trie data storage format and the data directory for your Besu database:
```

I assume the "Prune outdated trie logs" section goes into detail about this step. If so, it should be referenced here.

Author: I think we just want to provide the command here. Sending them to the Prune section will give them information in a circuitous way.

    ```bash
    sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --data-path=/var/lib/besu --sync-mode=X_SNAP storage x-trie-log prune
    ```
1. Start Besu.
1. Look for `Limit trie logs enabled: retention: 512; prune window: 30000` in your Besu configuration printout at startup.

## Prune outdated trie logs

When you start Besu with `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled`, it continuously prunes the unnecessary trie log data, removing it one block at a time.
This process begins after an initial reduction in the database size during startup.

Enabling `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled` on a long-running node does not immediately clear your backlog of trie logs in the same way resyncing does. 
Instead of resyncing, you can run an offline command to immediately prune old trie logs. 

> To run the offline command, you must shutdown Besu for a minimal period. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run the offline command, you must shut down Besu for a minimal period. 
```

2024-02-02 05:46:10.155+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogHelper | Restoring trie logs retained from batch 1...
2024-02-02 05:46:10.222+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogHelper | Key(0): 0xcd50706da7f6f2db7f9d54f3589122760900d9ab2508c20a4ca40b496d930368
... 
2024-02-02 05:46:10.336+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogHelper | Key(511): 0x238f9649b59616430ad7e43b8f3cf65bc97cac4aa54a3eddf3ad6ee666ce733e
2024-02-02 05:46:10.441+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogHelper | Deleting files...
2024-02-02 05:46:10.446+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogSubCommand | Finished pruning. Re-estimating trie logs size...
2024-02-02 05:46:11.023+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogSubCommand | Estimated trie logs size after pruning: 0 B (0 B estimate is normal when using default settings)
2024-02-02 05:46:11.023+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogSubCommand | Prune ran successfully. We estimate you freed up 9 GiB!
Prune ran successfully. We estimate you freed up 9 GiB!
```

If you are using a TOML configuration file, you can run a command similar to the following:

```bash
sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --config-file=besu-config.toml storage x-trie-log prune

> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```

````

## Troubleshoot

> Troubleshoot common errors that can occur when attempting to use the trie log prune command to reduce your database size for Bonsai Tries. 
> To minimize the occurence of errors, ensure your command specifies the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Troubleshoot common errors that can occur when using the trie log prune command to reduce your database size for Bonsai Tries.
To minimize errors, ensure your command specifies the following:
```

> - `--data-storage-format`
> - `--data-path`
> - `--sync-mode`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`--data-storage-format`](../reference/cli/options.md#data-storage-format)
- [`--data-path`](../reference/cli/options.md#data-path)
- [`--sync-mode`](../reference/cli/options.md#sync-mode)
```

> ### Prune command for mainnet

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Prune command for Mainnet
```

The prune command should look similar to the following:

```bash
sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-path=/var/lib/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --sync-mode=SNAP storage x-trie-log prune
```

Ensure you stop Besu before running the command.

###  Subcommand not working

`java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Subcommand only works with data-storage-format=BONSAI`

The `--data-storage-format=BONSAI` may be missing. 
To resolve, add the storage format. 
The command should look similar to the following:

> ```bash title="Specify data storage format"

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```bash
````

For consistency with the other examples.

sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --data-path=/var/lib/besu --sync-mode=SNAP storage x-trie-log prune
```

### Column handle not found for segment `TRIE_BRANCH_STORAGE`

`java.lang.RuntimeException: Column handle not found for segment TRIE_BRANCH_STORAGE`

> Ensure you specify the `data-path`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ensure you specify `--data-path`. 
```

Your command should look similar to the following:

```bash
sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-path=/var/lib/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --sync-mode=SNAP storage x-trie-log prune
```

### Database not detected

`java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Trying to retain more trie logs than chain length (0), skipping pruning`

Ensure you specify the correct `--data-path` for your node. 
Your command should look similar to the following:

```bash
sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-path=/var/lib/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --sync-mode=SNAP storage x-trie-log prune
```

### Cannot store generated private key

`java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Cannot store generated private key`

Ensure you specify the correct `--data-path` for your node. 
Your command should look similar to the following:

```bash
sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-path=/var/lib/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --sync-mode=SNAP storage x-trie-log prune
```

> ### Valid keyPair not provided

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Valid keypair not provided
```

Author: I am trying to mimic the error message. It is formatted as `keyPair`

`java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Supplied file does not contain valid keyPair pair.`

Check your file permissions and try running a `sudo` command to resolve the issue:

```bash
sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --data-path=/var/lib/besu storage --sync-mode=SNAP x-trie-log prune
```

### Column handle not found for segment `WORLD_STATE`

`java.lang.RuntimeException: Column handle not found for segment WORLD_STATE`

> Ensure you are using `data-storage-format=BONSAI` instead of `data-storage-format=FOREST` on an existing Bonsai database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ensure you are using `--data-storage-format=BONSAI` instead of `--data-storage-format=FOREST` on an existing Bonsai database.
```

### Resource temporarily unavailable

`org.hyperledger.besu.plugin.services.exception.StorageException: org.rocksdb.RocksDBException: While lock file: /data/besu/database/LOCK: Resource temporarily unavailable`

Check if Besu is already running. 
You must shut down the Besu client before running the subcommand.

### Unable to change the sync mode

`java.lang.IllegalStateException: Unable to change the sync mode when snap sync is incomplete, please restart with snap sync mode`

> Check that you have specified the `sync-mode`. 
> The default is `sync-mode=FAST`. 
> Most mainnet users use `X_SNAP` or `X_CHECKPOINT`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Check that you have specified `--sync-mode`. 
The default is `--sync-mode=FAST`. 
Most Mainnet users use `X_SNAP` or `X_CHECKPOINT`. 
```

### Cannot run trie log prune

`java.lang.RuntimeException: No finalized block present, can't safely run trie log prune`

This message may appear if your node is relatively new or recently resynced. 
To resolve this error, ensure that your node is fully synced and correctly configured to recognize finalized blocks.

### Block does not match stored chain data

`org.hyperledger.besu.util.InvalidConfigurationException: Supplied genesis block does not match chain data stored in /data/besu.`

> Check if you are running the command for a network other than mainnet. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Check if you are running the command for a network other than Mainnet. 
```
